Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the volatile anaesthetic agents. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
We turn to the volatile agents. Which are in current use,
and how are they classified structurally?
The volatile agents in current use are sevoflurane, isoflurane and desflurane,
with halothane and enflurane now largely of historical interest.
Structurally the modern agents are halogenated ethers:
isoflurane and desflurane are halogenated methyl ethyl ethers,
desflurane differing from isoflurane essentially by the substitution of fluorine
for chlorine, and sevoflurane is a halogenated methyl isopropyl ether.
Halothane, by contrast, is a halogenated alkane, not an ether.
The halogenation — with fluorine, and in the older agents chlorine or bromine —
confers the physical properties of volatility and non-flammability and influences
potency, metabolism and toxicity.
The trend over time has been towards fully fluorinated ethers,
which are more stable, less metabolised and less toxic,
at the cost of higher minimum alveolar concentration and, for desflurane,
awkward physical properties.
Compare their key physical and pharmacokinetic properties.
Taking the clinically important figures:
sevoflurane has a blood-gas partition coefficient of about zero-point-six-five and
a minimum alveolar concentration of around two per cent;
isoflurane a coefficient of about one-point-four and a minimum alveolar
concentration of around one-point-two per cent;
and desflurane a very low coefficient of about zero-point-four-two and a higher
minimum alveolar concentration of around six per cent.
So desflurane is the least soluble, giving the fastest onset and offset,
but the least potent; isoflurane is the most soluble of the three and intermediate
in potency; sevoflurane lies between.
Desflurane has a boiling point near room temperature and a very high saturated
vapour pressure, requiring a heated, pressurised vaporiser,
whereas sevoflurane and isoflurane are delivered by conventional variable-bypass
vaporisers.
These properties dictate both the speed of control and the equipment needed.
What is their mechanism of action?
The volatile agents act at multiple molecular targets rather than a single receptor.
The most important is enhancement of inhibitory transmission at the
gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptor,
and they also potentiate glycine receptors and inhibit excitatory transmission,
including at the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor,
and they activate certain potassium channels, hyperpolarising neurones.
The older lipid theory, based on the Meyer-Overton correlation,
held that anaesthesia arose from a non-specific perturbation of the lipid membrane,
but the current understanding is that these agents act on specific membrane
proteins — ion channels and receptors — producing a net depression of central
nervous system activity.
The multiplicity of targets explains their broad effects and the difficulty of
attributing anaesthesia to any single site.
Describe their effects on the central nervous system.
The volatile agents produce dose-dependent depression of the central nervous
system, from sedation to surgical anaesthesia.
They reduce the cerebral metabolic rate for oxygen,
but unlike the intravenous agents they are direct cerebral vasodilators,
so at higher concentrations they uncouple flow from metabolism and increase
cerebral blood flow and cerebral blood volume,
tending to raise intracranial pressure — an effect least marked with sevoflurane
and isoflurane at moderate concentrations and a reason to limit their concentration
in the patient with raised intracranial pressure.
They reduce the amplitude and slow the frequency of the electroencephalogram,
and at high concentration produce burst suppression,
though sevoflurane can produce epileptiform activity.
They impair autoregulation at higher doses.
So they combine reduced metabolism with vasodilatation,
a combination requiring care in neuroanaesthesia.
Now the cardiovascular effects.
All the volatile agents cause dose-dependent cardiovascular depression,
but with differing emphasis.
They reduce arterial blood pressure: isoflurane,
desflurane and sevoflurane do so predominantly by reducing systemic vascular
resistance through vasodilatation, with relatively preserved cardiac output,
whereas halothane did so predominantly by direct myocardial depression and reduced
output.
They depress myocardial contractility to varying degrees.
Halothane sensitised the myocardium to catecholamines and caused bradycardia and
arrhythmias, a major reason for its decline.
Desflurane, if its concentration is raised rapidly,
provokes a transient sympathetic surge with tachycardia and hypertension.
Isoflurane was once suspected of causing coronary steal,
diverting blood from ischaemic myocardium,
though this is now thought clinically unimportant.
So the modern agents lower pressure mainly by vasodilatation,
with agent-specific quirks.
And the respiratory effects?
The volatile agents are dose-dependent respiratory depressants,
reducing tidal volume and, at higher concentrations, respiratory rate,
and blunting the ventilatory responses to carbon dioxide and hypoxia;
they tend to produce rapid, shallow breathing.
They are bronchodilators, relaxing airway smooth muscle,
which is useful in the patient with bronchospasm,
sevoflurane being particularly favoured.
They differ markedly in airway irritability:
sevoflurane is sweet-smelling and non-irritant,
making it the agent of choice for inhalational induction, whereas desflurane and,
to a lesser extent, isoflurane are pungent and irritant, provoking coughing,
breath-holding and laryngospasm if used to induce anaesthesia,
so they are unsuitable for inhalational induction.
So all depress ventilation and dilate the airways,
but only sevoflurane is suitable for breathing down.
What are their effects on the neuromuscular junction and the uterus?
The volatile agents potentiate the action of non-depolarising neuromuscular
blocking drugs, so that less relaxant is needed when a volatile agent is used,
and they produce some muscle relaxation of their own.
Critically, they are the principal triggers of malignant hyperthermia in
susceptible individuals, which is a fundamental safety consideration.
On the uterus, the volatile agents cause dose-dependent relaxation of uterine
smooth muscle, which can increase blood loss at caesarean section and is a reason
to limit their concentration in obstetric anaesthesia,
but which is occasionally exploited deliberately to achieve uterine relaxation,
for instance for manual removal of a retained placenta or the management of certain
obstetric emergencies.
So they relax both skeletal and uterine muscle,
with both useful and adverse consequences.
Discuss their metabolism and the toxicities that arise from it.
The agents differ greatly in the extent to which they are metabolised,
which determines their potential for metabolic toxicity.
Halothane is extensively metabolised, around twenty per cent,
generating the reactive trifluoroacetyl species implicated in the immune-mediated
halothane hepatitis, and also undergoing reductive metabolism under hypoxia.
Sevoflurane is metabolised to a few per cent, releasing inorganic fluoride,
once a theoretical nephrotoxic concern but not borne out clinically,
and it is degraded by carbon-dioxide absorbents to compound A,
a nephrotoxin in animals, which influenced recommendations on fresh-gas flow.
Isoflurane is metabolised minimally, around zero-point-two per cent,
and desflurane almost not at all, around zero-point-zero-two per cent,
so these two carry essentially no metabolic toxicity.
The trend to fully fluorinated, minimally metabolised ethers was driven precisely
by the desire to avoid these toxicities.
Tell me about malignant hyperthermia as it relates to these agents.
All the potent volatile agents are triggers of malignant hyperthermia,
the inherited hypermetabolic disorder of skeletal muscle,
usually of the ryanodine receptor, in which exposure causes uncontrolled calcium
release, sustained contraction and a life-threatening hypermetabolic crisis with
rising end-tidal carbon dioxide, tachycardia, rigidity, hyperthermia,
acidosis and rhabdomyolysis.
Suxamethonium is the other trigger. Management is immediate cessation of the
trigger, calling for help, hyperventilation with high-flow oxygen, dantrolene,
and supportive treatment of the hyperthermia, acidosis,
hyperkalaemia and arrhythmias.
For the known-susceptible patient a trigger-free anaesthetic is planned,
using total intravenous anaesthesia with a vapour-free machine.
So the volatile agents' status as malignant-hyperthermia triggers is one of the
most important safety facts about them.
Take me through the individual profile of sevoflurane.
Sevoflurane is a fluorinated methyl isopropyl ether,
the modern agent of choice for inhalational induction because it is sweet-smelling
and non-irritant, allowing smooth breathing down,
and it has a low blood-gas solubility giving rapid onset and offset.
Its minimum alveolar concentration is around two per cent.
It causes the usual dose-dependent cardiovascular and respiratory depression,
predominantly by vasodilatation, without sensitising the myocardium to
catecholamines.
Its particular issues are degradation to compound A by carbon-dioxide absorbents,
which prompted caution with very low fresh-gas flows,
though this is now regarded as of little clinical importance with modern
absorbents; a small degree of metabolism releasing fluoride;
and emergence agitation in children.
It is a versatile, well-tolerated agent suitable for both induction and maintenance.
And isoflurane?
Isoflurane is a fluorinated methyl ethyl ether,
an older but still widely used agent, valued for being inexpensive and very stable,
and for being minimally metabolised, around zero-point-two per cent,
so it carries little metabolic toxicity.
Its minimum alveolar concentration is around one-point-two per cent and its
blood-gas coefficient about one-point-four,
making it the most soluble and slowest of the three modern agents.
It is pungent and irritant, so it is unsuitable for inhalational induction and is
used for maintenance. It lowers blood pressure mainly by vasodilatation with
relatively preserved cardiac output.
It was historically suspected of causing coronary steal,
a concern now regarded as clinically unimportant.
So isoflurane is a cheap, stable, low-toxicity maintenance agent whose drawbacks
are its pungency and its relatively slower kinetics.
Describe desflurane.
Desflurane is a fully fluorinated methyl ethyl ether,
differing from isoflurane by fluorine in place of chlorine,
which gives it the lowest blood-gas solubility of the agents,
around zero-point-four-two, and so the fastest onset, offset and recovery,
particularly valuable in prolonged surgery and in the obese where rapid recovery is
wanted.
It is almost not metabolised, around zero-point-zero-two per cent,
so it has negligible metabolic toxicity.
Its drawbacks are significant: a boiling point near room temperature and a very
high saturated vapour pressure require a special heated, pressurised vaporiser;
it is pungent and irritant, unsuitable for inhalational induction;
rapid increases in its concentration provoke a sympathetic surge with tachycardia
and hypertension; and it is by far the most potent greenhouse gas of the volatile
agents, a major environmental concern now limiting its use.
And a word on halothane, for completeness.
Halothane is a halogenated alkane, the agent that dominated practice for decades
but is now little used in many countries.
It is potent, with a minimum alveolar concentration around zero-point-seven-five
per cent, non-irritant and pleasant for inhalational induction,
which was its great strength.
Its decline was driven by its disadvantages: extensive metabolism,
around twenty per cent, generating the reactive species responsible for the rare
but severe immune-mediated halothane hepatitis;
sensitisation of the myocardium to catecholamines with a propensity to bradycardia
and ventricular arrhythmias; and direct myocardial depression.
It remains in use in some parts of the world on grounds of cost and its value for
inhalational induction. It is a useful reference point against which the safety
improvements of the modern agents are measured.
How are the volatile agents used — induction and maintenance?
Their principal use is the maintenance of anaesthesia,
the agent vaporised into the fresh-gas flow and its end-tidal concentration
titrated, usually to above one minimum alveolar concentration adjusted for the
patient and for any co-administered opioid.
Sevoflurane is additionally used for inhalational induction,
by gradually increasing or, in the single-breath technique,
immediately delivering a high concentration, which is valuable in children,
in the patient with a difficult airway in whom spontaneous ventilation is to be
preserved, and where intravenous access is difficult.
The pungent agents, isoflurane and desflurane, are confined to maintenance.
The choice of maintenance agent balances kinetics, cost, recovery quality and,
increasingly, environmental impact,
with sevoflurane and desflurane favoured for rapid recovery and isoflurane for
economy.
Discuss the environmental impact of the volatile agents.
The volatile agents are greenhouse gases,
vented largely unchanged to the atmosphere,
and their environmental impact has become a significant consideration.
They differ greatly: desflurane has by far the greatest global-warming potential,
many times that of sevoflurane, and a long atmospheric lifetime,
so that its use is now actively discouraged or restricted on environmental grounds
in many institutions.
Nitrous oxide is both a greenhouse gas and an ozone-depleting agent,
and its widespread piped use compounds its effect.
Mitigation includes preferring agents of lower impact such as sevoflurane,
using low fresh-gas flows to reduce waste,
considering total intravenous anaesthesia,
avoiding desflurane and nitrous oxide where alternatives serve,
and developing capture technologies.
Environmental responsibility has become a genuine factor in agent choice,
alongside the clinical considerations.
Pull it together: how do you choose a volatile agent for a given patient?
I would weigh kinetics, the clinical situation, toxicity and environmental impact.
For inhalational induction — a child,
a difficult airway with spontaneous ventilation,
no intravenous access — sevoflurane is the clear choice for its non-irritant,
sweet smell and rapid control.
For maintenance where rapid, duration-independent recovery matters,
in the obese or in long surgery, desflurane's low solubility is attractive,
but tempered now by its environmental impact and its sympathetic surge,
so sevoflurane is often preferred.
For economy, isoflurane serves for maintenance.
In the patient with raised intracranial pressure I would limit the concentration
because of cerebral vasodilatation;
in bronchospasm I would value the bronchodilatation;
in the malignant-hyperthermia-susceptible I would avoid them entirely for total
intravenous anaesthesia.
And across all choices I would use low fresh-gas flows and prefer lower-impact
agents for the environment.
Explain how the degree of fluorination influences the properties of the ethers.
Progressive replacement of other halogens by fluorine, and fuller fluorination,
has driven the evolution of the agents towards greater stability and safety.
Fluorine forms very strong, stable carbon-fluorine bonds,
so the fully fluorinated agents resist metabolism,
which reduces the formation of toxic metabolites — desflurane is almost not
metabolised and carries negligible metabolic toxicity,
whereas the less fluorinated, more metabolised halothane generates the reactive
species behind its hepatitis.
Fluorination also tends to reduce blood solubility, speeding kinetics,
and to reduce potency, raising the minimum alveolar concentration,
and it affects volatility, desflurane's high vapour pressure being a consequence.
So the trend to fully fluorinated ethers has bought stability,
low metabolism and rapid kinetics at the cost of higher minimum alveolar
concentration and, for desflurane, awkward physical properties and environmental
persistence.
Give the saturated vapour pressures and boiling points and their significance.
Sevoflurane and isoflurane have saturated vapour pressures and boiling points that
allow delivery by conventional variable-bypass,
temperature-compensated vaporisers — isoflurane boiling at around forty-nine
degrees and sevoflurane at around fifty-eight.
Desflurane is the outlier: it has a very high saturated vapour pressure and a
boiling point of around twenty-three degrees, close to room temperature,
so a conventional vaporiser would deliver an uncontrollable,
variable output and the agent would boil at warm room temperatures.
This is why desflurane requires a special vaporiser that heats and pressurises the
agent to a stable vapour and meters it into the gas stream electronically.
So the physical properties dictate the engineering of the delivery device,
and desflurane's volatility is the reason for its unique heated vaporiser.
What stabilisers or degradation concerns attach to these agents?
The agents differ in stability and in their interaction with the breathing system.
Halothane was prone to oxidative decomposition and was stabilised with thymol,
which could gum up vaporisers.
Sevoflurane can be degraded by Lewis acids and, importantly,
by the strong bases in carbon-dioxide absorbents to compound A,
a vinyl ether nephrotoxic in animals, the production of which is increased by dry,
warm absorbent and very low fresh-gas flows.
All the volatile agents, particularly when the absorbent is desiccated,
can be degraded to carbon monoxide, a recognised hazard,
desflurane and isoflurane producing more than sevoflurane.
These concerns drove the move to absorbents free of the strong hydroxide bases,
which are far less reactive, largely removing the compound A and carbon monoxide
risks.
Describe their effects on cerebral autoregulation and carbon-dioxide reactivity.
At low concentrations the cerebral effects are modest,
but as the concentration rises the volatile agents progressively impair cerebral
autoregulation — the ability of the cerebral circulation to maintain constant flow
across a range of pressures — so that cerebral blood flow becomes more
pressure-passive, a concern in the patient with intracranial pathology.
Carbon-dioxide reactivity, the responsiveness of cerebral vessels to carbon
dioxide, is relatively preserved, which is clinically valuable because it means
hyperventilation to reduce carbon dioxide can still be used to lower cerebral blood
volume and intracranial pressure and to offset the agents' vasodilatation.
So in neuroanaesthesia I would limit the volatile concentration to below about one
minimum alveolar concentration to preserve autoregulation,
and use moderate hyperventilation, exploiting the preserved carbon-dioxide
reactivity.
What is the significance of the desflurane sympathetic surge,
and how is it mitigated?
A rapid increase in the inspired concentration of desflurane,
and to a lesser extent isoflurane, provokes a transient surge of sympathetic
activity, with a rise in heart rate and blood pressure and sometimes catecholamine
release, attributed to airway and other receptor stimulation by the pungent agent.
This is undesirable in the patient with coronary disease,
in whom the tachycardia and hypertension increase myocardial oxygen demand,
and where a stable heart rate is wanted.
It is mitigated by avoiding rapid increases in concentration — raising the
concentration gradually — by establishing anaesthesia with another agent before
introducing desflurane, and by co-administering an opioid or a beta-blocker to
blunt the response.
So although desflurane's kinetics are attractive,
its tendency to provoke sympathetic stimulation must be managed,
particularly in the cardiac patient.
Tell me about emergence agitation with sevoflurane in children.
Sevoflurane, and to some extent the other rapidly eliminated agents,
is associated with emergence agitation or delirium in children — a state of
restlessness, inconsolability and disorientation during recovery,
distinct from pain, which can be distressing and risk injury.
It is commoner in young children, after rapid emergence,
and after procedures such as those on the eyes and ears.
Its cause is not fully understood.
It is reduced by ensuring adequate analgesia, since pain contributes,
by a calm recovery environment, and by measures such as a small dose of propofol,
an alpha-two agonist such as dexmedetomidine or clonidine,
or an opioid towards the end of surgery.
So it is a recognised, usually self-limiting phenomenon of paediatric sevoflurane
anaesthesia that is anticipated and mitigated rather than a reason to avoid the
agent.
What is the history of fluoride nephrotoxicity with the inhalational agents?
The concern arose with methoxyflurane, an older,
highly metabolised agent that released large amounts of inorganic fluoride,
which caused a dose-related nephrotoxicity — a high-output renal failure — leading
to its withdrawal.
This established a threshold of plasma fluoride above which nephrotoxicity was
feared.
Enflurane and sevoflurane also release fluoride on metabolism,
and this prompted theoretical caution,
particularly with sevoflurane at low fresh-gas flows; however,
extensive clinical experience has not shown sevoflurane to cause significant
nephrotoxicity, because the fluoride is generated and cleared differently and the
peak concentrations and site of production differ from methoxyflurane.
So the fluoride concern, real for methoxyflurane,
has not translated into clinical harm for sevoflurane,
and it is now regarded as of historical rather than practical importance.
Detail the mechanism of halothane hepatitis.
Halothane hepatitis is a rare, severe, immune-mediated hepatotoxicity.
Halothane undergoes oxidative metabolism, around twenty per cent,
to a reactive trifluoroacetyl chloride intermediate that binds covalently to
hepatic proteins, forming trifluoroacetylated neoantigens.
In susceptible, usually previously exposed individuals,
an immune response is mounted against these altered proteins,
producing fulminant hepatic necrosis with a high mortality.
Risk factors include repeated exposure over a short interval, obesity,
middle age and female sex.
A milder, commoner subclinical hepatic disturbance also occurs,
probably through reductive metabolism under hypoxia.
The recognition of this mechanism, and the cross-sensitisation possible with other
agents sharing the trifluoroacetyl metabolite,
contributed to the replacement of halothane by the minimally metabolised modern
ethers, which essentially do not form this reactive species.
How do the volatile agents affect hepatic and splanchnic blood flow?
The volatile agents reduce systemic vascular resistance and arterial pressure and
can reduce hepatic and splanchnic blood flow,
which is relevant to the perfusion of the liver and to the clearance of
flow-limited drugs.
The modern agents, by preserving cardiac output and through the liver's capacity to
maintain total hepatic blood flow via the hepatic arterial buffer response,
tend to preserve hepatic oxygen delivery better than halothane,
which reduced hepatic blood flow more.
Maintaining adequate arterial pressure and avoiding deep planes protects hepatic
perfusion.
This matters in the patient with liver disease and influences the choice and depth
of agent, and it is one of the reasons the modern agents,
with their predominantly vasodilator and output-preserving profile,
are preferred over halothane.
Quantify the interaction with neuromuscular blocking drugs.
The volatile agents potentiate the action of non-depolarising neuromuscular
blocking drugs in a dose-dependent manner,
increasing the depth and duration of block and reducing the dose of relaxant
required, with desflurane and sevoflurane generally potentiating somewhat more than
isoflurane and far more than intravenous-only anaesthesia.
The mechanism involves effects at the neuromuscular junction and on muscle.
The practical consequences are that less relaxant is needed when a volatile agent
is used, that the block may last longer and be slower to reverse,
and that neuromuscular monitoring is needed to titrate the relaxant and confirm
full recovery before extubation.
So the volatile agent is part of the calculation when dosing and reversing a
neuromuscular blocker.
Discuss the uterine effects and their obstetric relevance.
The volatile agents cause dose-dependent relaxation of uterine smooth muscle.
In obstetric general anaesthesia for caesarean section this is a disadvantage,
because uterine relaxation can increase blood loss and the risk of haemorrhage,
so the concentration of volatile agent is kept modest,
typically around or below one minimum alveolar concentration,
often supplemented by other agents,
to balance adequate anaesthesia and prevention of awareness against uterine tone.
The same uterine relaxation is occasionally exploited deliberately, however,
where rapid uterine relaxation is needed — for the internal manipulation of a
fetus, the management of a retained placenta,
or certain intrapartum emergencies — a high concentration of volatile agent
providing the relaxation.
So the uterine effect is usually a hazard to be limited but is sometimes a useful
tool.
Describe the technique of inhalational induction with sevoflurane.
Inhalational induction exploits sevoflurane's non-irritant,
sweet smell and rapid kinetics. In the incremental technique the inspired
concentration is increased gradually, breath by breath,
until anaesthesia is established, which is gentle and well tolerated.
In the single-breath, or vital-capacity, technique the patient,
after priming the breathing system with a high concentration,
takes a single maximal breath and holds it, producing rapid induction,
useful in the cooperative adult.
Inhalational induction is valued in children,
who often cannot tolerate awake cannulation;
in the patient with a difficult airway where spontaneous ventilation is to be
preserved; and where intravenous access is difficult.
Throughout, the airway and depth are monitored,
and intravenous access is secured once the patient is anaesthetised.
The non-irritant nature of sevoflurane is what makes this smooth and practicable.
What occupational and scavenging considerations attach to the volatile agents?
Chronic exposure of theatre staff to waste anaesthetic gases is a recognised
occupational concern, prompting the use of scavenging systems to remove waste gas
from the breathing system and theatre, good theatre ventilation,
well-maintained low-leak equipment,
and the use of cuffed airways and low fresh-gas flows to reduce pollution.
Nitrous oxide in particular, through its effect on vitamin B-twelve and methionine
synthase, has been a focus of concern for chronically exposed staff,
including in relation to reproductive outcomes,
though the evidence is not strong where scavenging is adequate.
So minimising waste, scavenging effectively,
and reducing the use of the more problematic agents protect both staff and,
as discussed, the environment, and are part of safe and responsible theatre
practice.
Pull together how you would choose between sevoflurane and desflurane for
maintenance.
Both are rapidly controllable ethers suitable for maintenance.
Desflurane has the lower solubility and so the fastest,
most duration-independent recovery,
which is attractive in prolonged surgery and in the obese,
where its rapid washout aids a clear-headed emergence and early return of airway
reflexes.
Against this, desflurane is pungent,
provokes a sympathetic surge if increased rapidly,
requires a special heated vaporiser, and is by far the most potent greenhouse gas,
which now weighs heavily against it.
Sevoflurane recovers almost as quickly for most cases, is non-irritant,
has a much smaller environmental footprint, and can also be used for induction.
So for most maintenance I would choose sevoflurane,
reserving desflurane for the specific case where its very rapid recovery is
genuinely advantageous, and even then mindful of its environmental cost and using
low fresh-gas flows.
How do the volatile agents affect evoked potentials and intraoperative
neuromonitoring?
The volatile agents depress evoked potentials in a dose-dependent way,
reducing the amplitude and increasing the latency of the cortical responses,
with the cortically generated signals such as the somatosensory and especially the
motor evoked potentials being the most sensitive.
This matters during surgery in which these potentials are monitored to protect
neural structures — spinal, posterior fossa and certain vascular and orthopaedic
procedures — because too high a concentration of volatile agent can abolish the
signals and prevent monitoring.
The practical response is to limit the volatile concentration,
often to below about half a minimum alveolar concentration,
or to use total intravenous anaesthesia,
which depresses these potentials less and gives more reliable monitoring,
particularly of motor evoked potentials.
So the choice and depth of agent is influenced by the need for neuromonitoring.
Explain the coronary steal controversy with isoflurane.
Isoflurane is a coronary vasodilator, and it was hypothesised that,
by dilating the resistance vessels supplying healthy myocardium,
it might divert — steal — blood away from an ischaemic region supplied through a
stenosis whose vessels were already maximally dilated, worsening ischaemia,
a particular concern in patients with coronary disease and so-called steal-prone
anatomy.
This generated considerable debate. Subsequent clinical study did not establish
that isoflurane causes clinically important coronary steal or worse outcomes when
blood pressure and heart rate are maintained,
and the concern is now regarded as of little practical importance.
Indeed the volatile agents are thought to confer a degree of myocardial protection
through preconditioning. So coronary steal is now a historical concern rather than
a reason to avoid isoflurane, provided haemodynamics are controlled.
Tell me about anaesthetic preconditioning.
Anaesthetic, or ischaemic, preconditioning is the phenomenon whereby exposure of
the myocardium to a volatile agent before a period of ischaemia renders it more
resistant to ischaemic injury, reducing infarct size and protecting function,
through the activation of protective intracellular signalling pathways and
mitochondrial potassium channels that mimic the protection conferred by brief
ischaemic episodes.
It is a genuine experimental and, to some degree, clinical effect,
and it is one reason a volatile-based technique has been considered potentially
advantageous in cardiac surgery, although the clinical outcome evidence is mixed
and the matter remains debated.
The concept is a counterweight to the old coronary-steal concern,
suggesting that the volatile agents may protect rather than harm the ischaemic
myocardium, and it is an example of a beneficial,
non-anaesthetic action of these drugs.
A word on enflurane and its epileptogenic potential, for completeness.
Enflurane is a halogenated ether, an older agent now little used,
notable pharmacologically for its epileptogenic potential: at high concentrations,
and particularly in the presence of hypocapnia,
it can produce electroencephalographic seizure activity and even clinical
convulsions, so it was avoided in patients with epilepsy.
It also released more fluoride than its successors and produced more cardiovascular
and respiratory depression.
It is largely of historical interest, superseded by the safer modern agents,
but it is worth knowing as the clearest example of a volatile agent that lowers
rather than raises the seizure threshold,
a contrast with the anticonvulsant intravenous agents and a reminder that the
inhalational agents are not uniform in their cerebral effects — sevoflurane too can
produce epileptiform activity at high concentration.
Compare the cardiovascular profiles of the agents side by side.
All cause dose-dependent hypotension,
but by different mechanisms and with different secondary effects.
Halothane lowers pressure chiefly by direct myocardial depression and reduced
cardiac output, causes bradycardia,
and sensitises the myocardium to catecholamines, predisposing to arrhythmias.
Isoflurane, sevoflurane and desflurane lower pressure predominantly by reducing
systemic vascular resistance through vasodilatation,
with relatively preserved cardiac output and without sensitising the myocardium to
catecholamines.
Isoflurane and desflurane tend to cause a mild tachycardia,
and desflurane provokes a sympathetic surge if increased rapidly;
sevoflurane causes the least change in heart rate.
So the modern agents share a vasodilator, output-preserving,
arrhythmia-sparing profile that is far more favourable than halothane's myocardial
depression and arrhythmogenicity, which was a principal reason for halothane's
replacement.
What is the rationale for low-flow anaesthesia, and what must be monitored?
Low-flow anaesthesia uses a fresh-gas flow lower than the patient's minute
ventilation in a circle system, so that much of the expired gas,
after carbon-dioxide absorption, is rebreathed.
The rationale is economy — far less volatile agent and gas are consumed — reduced
atmospheric pollution and cost, and better preservation of heat and humidity.
The requirements and cautions are that,
because the inspired concentration of agent and oxygen now differs from the
fresh-gas setting, the inspired oxygen and the inspired and end-tidal agent
concentrations must be monitored continuously,
and adequate oxygen delivery ensured to prevent a hypoxic mixture;
the absorbent must be functioning; and the wash-in is slower,
so higher flows are used initially.
With these safeguards, low-flow anaesthesia is the standard responsible technique,
reducing both cost and environmental impact.
Do the volatile agents affect the QT interval or other aspects of the
electrocardiogram?
The volatile agents can prolong the QT interval to a degree,
which is worth bearing in mind in the patient with congenital or acquired long-QT
syndrome or taking other QT-prolonging drugs,
in whom the additive effect could predispose to the polymorphic ventricular
tachycardia torsades de pointes; sevoflurane has been studied in this regard.
Halothane, distinctively, sensitised the myocardium to catecholamines and
predisposed to ventricular arrhythmias, which the modern agents do not.
So while the modern ethers are largely free of serious arrhythmogenicity,
their modest QT effect is a consideration in the susceptible patient,
in whom electrolyte disturbance and other QT-prolonging drugs would be corrected or
avoided and the electrocardiogram monitored.
Restate the ideal inhalational agent and judge the modern agents against it.
The ideal agent would be stable, non-flammable, easily vaporised,
of low solubility for rapid control, potent, providing anaesthesia,
analgesia and relaxation, free of cardiovascular, respiratory,
hepatic and renal toxicity, not metabolised to toxic products,
not a malignant-hyperthermia trigger, non-irritant,
and cheap and environmentally benign.
Judged against this, sevoflurane is non-irritant,
rapidly controllable and minimally toxic but is metabolised slightly,
can form compound A and causes emergence agitation in children.
Desflurane has the best kinetics and least metabolism but is pungent,
needs a special vaporiser, causes a sympathetic surge and is a potent greenhouse
gas. Isoflurane is cheap, stable and minimally metabolised but pungent and slower.
All trigger malignant hyperthermia and relax the uterus.
So each is a useful compromise, none ideal,
and the environmental criterion has become newly prominent in the judgement.
Finally, what is your overall approach to the responsible use of volatile agents?
My approach combines clinical and environmental responsibility.
I would choose the agent suited to the case — sevoflurane for inhalational
induction and for most maintenance,
desflurane only where its very rapid recovery is genuinely needed,
isoflurane for economy — and titrate the end-tidal concentration to an
individualised fraction of minimum alveolar concentration, adjusting for age,
opioids and physiological state, and limiting the concentration where
autoregulation, neuromonitoring or uterine tone demand it.
I would avoid the volatile agents entirely in the
malignant-hyperthermia-susceptible.
I would routinely use low fresh-gas flows to reduce waste, cost and pollution,
scavenge effectively, and prefer agents of lower environmental impact,
avoiding desflurane and nitrous oxide where alternatives serve,
and considering total intravenous anaesthesia.
So I would aim to deliver safe, controlled anaesthesia while minimising both
toxicity to the patient and harm to the environment.
Thank you. That was a thorough and well-structured account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Modern volatile agents are halogenated ethers (sevoflurane, isoflurane,
desflurane; halothane is a historical alkane);
fuller fluorination gives greater stability,
less metabolism and less toxicity at higher MAC.
Second, Desflurane is least soluble (fastest, needs a heated vaporiser,
sympathetic surge), isoflurane most soluble and cheapest,
sevoflurane non-irritant and the agent for inhalational induction.
Third, They act at multiple targets (mainly GABA-A potentiation),
reduce CMRO2 but are cerebral vasodilators raising ICP,
depress the cardiovascular system mainly by vasodilatation, and are bronchodilators.
Fourth, All potent volatiles trigger malignant hyperthermia and potentiate
non-depolarising blockers and uterine relaxation;
metabolism-related toxicity (halothane hepatitis,
sevoflurane compound A/fluoride) falls with fluorination.
Fifth, Agent choice now weighs kinetics, airway irritability,
toxicity and environmental impact — desflurane and nitrous oxide are potent
greenhouse gases, favouring sevoflurane, low fresh-gas flows,
or total intravenous anaesthesia.
Thank you. That concludes the station.